---
layout: post
title: Manage multiple Python versions with pyenv
categories: [blog]
tags: [python]
mermaid: true
---

At the time of this writing (2026), the latest release of Python is already at [version 3.14](https://www.python.org/downloads/), with pre-release of version 3.15 planned within the year. Python version 3.10 end of life is also slated within this year. Development is rapid, which is good for this language with such an active and large community behind it. However, tools depending on Python are not necessarily updated to keep up with this schedule. And because if something works, why fix it, some of these tools may not be updated at all.

Hence, it might be necessary to keep multiple versions of Python in one machine. To make switching between versions easier, there's a tool called `pyenv`. Unlike similar tools, `pyenv` does not itself depend on Python and is built purely from shell scripts. 

More detailed installation guide can be found in the [`pyenv` Github page](https://github.com/pyenv/pyenv). Essentially, because it uses shell scripts, it runs in Unix systems. This means that for Windows, Windows Subsystem for Linux (WSL) is required. 


## Installation

Here are the steps for MacOS:

Update Homebrew and install from there
```zsh
brew update
brew install pyenv
```

Append the following to the shell configuration file to add `pyenv` to the startup commands. To know which shell the terminal is using, run `echo $SHELL`, e.g. for `zsh`

```zsh
echo 'export PYENV_ROOT="$HOME/.pyenv"' >> ~/.zshrc
echo '[[ -d $PYENV_ROOT/bin ]] && export PATH="$PYENV_ROOT/bin:$PATH"' >> ~/.zshrc
echo 'eval "$(pyenv init - zsh)"' >> ~/.zshrc
```

Additionally, the following might be needed to be added into `.profile` (if prompted)

Open `.profile` in an editor (e.g. vim), and add the following lines

```zsh

export PYENV_ROOT="$HOME/.pyenv"
export PATH="$PYENV_ROOT/bin:$PATH"
eval "$(pyenv init --path)"
```

## Run `pyenv`

Try checking if `pyenv` has been successfully installed and available from the terminal. If not, refresh the terminal first e.g. run `zsh` command.

Run

```zsh
pyenv
```

To check the available versions of Python in the machine run

```zsh
pyenv versions
```

`system` indicates the default Python available in the machine.

## Install Python version

To install other Python versions, use `pyenv install`

Run help
```zsh
pyenv install --help
```

List all available versions to download
```zsh
pyenv install --list
```

Install a version e.g. version 3.10.7

```zsh
pyenv install 3.10.7
```

Check if the are now new versions of Python installed in the machine

```zsh
pyenv versions
```

Example output
```
* system (set by /Users/user/.pyenv/version)
  3.10.7
```

## Use a Python version

To switch to the newly installed version, run either

```zsh
pyenv shell 3.10.7
```

which enables usage of the version in the current terminal only, or to make the version available in a new terminal, run

```zsh
python global 3.10.7
```

To switch back to the Python version originally installed in the machine, revert to the system installation

```zsh
pyenv global system
```

## Further resource
- [Python releases information](https://www.python.org/downloads/)
- [pyenv Github page](https://github.com/pyenv/)
- Real Python Article: [Managing multiple Python versions with pyenv](https://realpython.com/intro-to-pyenv/)